This is an interview with Craig Champion by Susan
Turgeon on November 26, 1988, at Craig Champion's
home in Grosbeck, Texas, concerning the Vietnam
War. In the interest of accumulating knowledge
about the war, I'm going to donate this type to the
Texas A&M oral history collection in the
university archives. Is that all right with you?
Yes. Were you drafted or did you enlist?
Volunteer. Volunteer. Out of high school,
or how old were you then? I was 19. Did you have any
thoughts? I mean, did you really know what was
going on over there, or what we were fighting for?
Not really. In high school, I don't think that
nobody really gave Vietnam a thought. And right
out of high school, I went to Prairie Game College.
Right out of school, I went to summer school. And
still haven't given the first
thought. Maybe it crossed my mind some, but that's
a long one. We have everybody. Talked about, in the
year 66, year after, talked about joining the
Marine Corps. But he might have been going on the
police system. But I don't think he could pass the
pistol, so I just put him on the police. Got a letter
from the draft board. So I just went on down to
the barbecue and kind of kicked it up. Really
didn't know what was going on until you got in the
Army and then they let you know what the question
was. Did they tell you about the politics and
everything? I mean, did you know what you were
fighting for while you were there? No, it was about
the only thing the Army basic training would tell
you. It was communism. Nothing in detail. and how
we got over there and why we went over there. Did
they train you militarily adequately for when you
got there for the kind of war that it was? The
training, was it appropriate because it was a
guerrilla war? Well, it's kind of hard to train for
that really. I guess we went through the standard
basic training. Uh, AIT, I was a combat medic.
I went through a medical training for eight months
before I went over. And, uh, I was just working in
the hospital. And I dealt with a lot of, uh, wounded
Vietnam boys coming back from the Iranian farm.
And, uh, of course, I, I got, uh, pretty well
informed on what was going over, you know, before I
got there. But
as
far as what kind of action he was going to see when he
got over there, it depended on where they sent you.
What's it called? The Highlands, you know, the
Delta, Acon. I got sent to the Acon Delta. You
didn't see much action with what's called a
regular army, mostly up north until 10. Most of our
combat time was spent fighting snipers. It
kind of reminded
me of the cowboy and Indian day, you know, the
cowboy riding through and Indians waiting on them
as they stopped to pick them up. And putting up the
booty traps. So it was always the unexpected you
had to be ready for. Where were you stationed over
there? Base camp was a place called Dome Town. And
when I got there, they attached me to what's called
a mobile riverine force. And they put us on a ship
that was anchored in the Mekong Harbor Bay. And
they had what's called ATCs on personnel carriers
and Navy around. And they'd load us up on those
grassroots early in the morning before daybreak.
And we grew up in these clouds. and then they'd turn
in the beach and we had to unload straight into the
jungle and we may walk anywhere from a day to two
weeks before we came back before helicopters came
in and picked us up but we came back around to the
river so when we went out you really didn't know how
long we were going to be out When you went out there,
what was your mission?
Just to find Cypress, or?
They had titles called Search and Destroy,
Ambush Patrol, and just Recon. Most of them were
just Search and Destroy missions. Maybe get a tip
from one of the civilians, whatever. That's it.
Maybe a bunker full
of guns or grenades or whatever in this village. If
it looked like it was D.C. controlled, the way you
could tell that was by the amount of rice they had
stored in the underground tunnels that they built
in the bunkers inside the hoochies. You
can go down in those things and if they were pretty
well fortified, lots of blankets and first aid
equipment, you knew it was probably at least easy
to get behind the camp and build those places up and
come and get down. A lot of times you wouldn't get
the right one until, you know, a lot of people suck
at being civilian and I'm just part of being in a war
area. How
did
the people at Church of the Reign meet people that
you encountered? About as well as you treat them.
If you treated them like human beings, they liked
the GI. Of course, there's always ones that, you
know, the police would like to push them around.
And I've always thought that Somebody
pushed one around, and they got word to the Fiat
car. And the smart people, the real smart people,
said they could pick him out. The sniper could pick
him out and be the first one to go down. I couldn't
prove that, but I've seen it happen. A guy that
just, let's say a bully may steal a coat or
something, a coat leg, an old thing that had been
stolen. little baskets on the pole and they'd run
down to the paddy bikes. Sometimes they'd run
right up to you in a firefight. Of course, we
wouldn't be following them. And I'd try to sell you
a coat. And somebody, you know, steal a little old
lady's coat or something like that. That's an
explanation of how they did it a couple months ago.
uh,
ironic
or whatever, but I've always
thought that they had a lot of ties with the Viet
Cong. You know, uh, they're sons, cousins or
whatever, you know. And, uh, but they, uh, the Viet
Cong, you know, they were, uh, mostly civilians in
the daytime, plowing or whatever, and then, uh,
they'd either drop a plow to get to AK-47 or, during
the daytime
or most times at night times. Did you fight any with
Arlen, please? Yeah, yeah. What kind
of fighters were those? I've heard we've had
people come and talk to us and we've had
discrepancies report. They're another group. I
think a lot of it's too dependent on what outfit and
who trained them. A
good trained orbit outfit I've seen by a great,
great majority of them, in my opinion. Just
cracked a little bit. They'd wear their little
silk headscarves, or blue scarves, or green
scarves, whatever outfit they were with. Didn't
see a lot of them actually. You
think we should have given them more
responsibility? worked more closely with them
and trained them into their job instead of, it
seemed like we went over there and we took care of
everything and they were just kind of on the side.
Yeah, that's basically the way it was. I don't even
know, I don't think that we would have given them
any more authority whether they would have
handled the situation. It would have been a bigger
mess. If
Washington would have just let the army do their
job over there, it would have been over a hundred
times better. You think the war could have been won
if it had been fought differently? Sure. A lot of
people got wealthy back here. And that's the
expense of a lot of young men. But I never gave that
much thought while I was over there.
That was only after I got back and, you know, years
later. It seems like just in the past few years that
the Vietnam Air experience, you know, is coming
back. And the movies, you know, you read a lot about
it and you can't pick up the paper. I'm just now kind
of digging into the heart of it. But at that time in
68, I didn't
care
less about politics. I went over because I
was, you know, for my country. As corny as it seems,
that's why I was there. And I was ready to give
everything I had. Do you think the government
betrayed you now that you know that they weren't
doing everything they could and you were over
there trying to give it your all? I
never thought of it as betraying me, but I guess you
could look at it like that. Of course, I don't hold
many grudges with any of them, because I don't even
know them. And I often thought that it was all to do
over again, though I don't know how would I have
done it. I'm not so sure I would. I'm not so sure I
would leave. It was just too costly. They're
alive. The money is left. It's alive. Did you have
buddies that didn't come back that were killed
over there? Yeah, that's it. Of course, you got to
pay a lot of money in the medics. Yeah. Yeah, I was
just about 12, 100% of the time. I had a lot of them. A
couple wounded, enough to come back. I lost one
today where they're at . I
don't
know. I don't know. I know some of them are fine. I
know one was paralyzed and was shot in the spine.
I'm also one that's definitely on the back. You
haven't seen any of them since you went in there?
The only contact I've made was with my best friend.
He was blown up by a claymore monster. He was from El
Campo. And
he was at the hospital, San Antonio, about a year. I
had about three months left in the country when he
was killed. I wrote his fiancee and his mom and dad,
and they got back in contact with me, and we
corresponded. And when I got back, I drove to San
Antonio to stay in contact with him. He
was a pretty big old boy and he messed up pretty good
and lost an eye and got a steel plate in his head and
the rest of it kind of looks like hamburgers. He
came through it pretty well. He got married and got
his degree in oceanography. I hadn't heard from
him in five or six years. So
as far as I know, he's the one that scarred that. The
news coverage that was covered by TV, do you think a
lot of that was accurate? that was
portrayed back over here. Did you ever work with a
news team? Yeah, we had a news week that followed us
for about 60 days. And on this educational
channel, when they had this Vietnam stuff going
on, I'm not real sure, but I think I saw a shot.
Captions
of who it was, a lot of food, just tapes and bits and
pieces from a lot of correspondence. Well, yeah, a
lot of it had to be because it was live. The camera
was, you know, they had it there rolling. You think
that should have been shown back over here? I don't
know.
I
know my mom and dad, they kept up with us pretty
close. Dad moved and went out and bought a huge,
wild Vietnam map, and I'd write a letter and tell
him, you know, where we were going on this next
operation, or where we'd been, and what we were
doing before then. He'd get out, and I noticed he
had it all marked on the map. It was about every
place that I drove and told him where we'd been on
the population, so he kept up with me.
I don't know. I think maybe it helped them to... I
think in the back of their mind, they really knew
what was going on in there. I think maybe the TV
coverage kind of helped them. I'd want to know what
my son was. There was a lot, maybe a lot of school,
you know, battle on the TV. Were
you out of one of your tears, did you? What's your
opinion about that? Do you think that they should
have been longer tours or do you think that by the
time you got over there, well, we've been told that
you got over there and you had like, by the time you
got out in the field, you had like six months just to
get out in the field because you went to Vietnam and
then you got your orders and you went to Saigon for a
while and then you got shipped out. Do you think you
were there long enough to have an impact for just
one year? Or do you think it should have been...
Because I said, people I've talked to said that,
like, by the time you have, like, three months
left, well, you're not worried about anything but
getting back alive, mainly. You know, that you're
just, you're ready to go home. And you're not so
much concerned about fighting, you're just
really worried about keeping yourself alive.
Yeah. What they call getting sharp. And where it
will last, I guess, 90 days. I mean... It kind of
weighs on your mind. You don't want to blow it. This
late in the game, you want to get out of it. But I've
always felt like that the more careful you try to be
when you get shortest window, you're going to mess
up. I don't know. I think I lived the last day the
same as I lived the first day. I came close a lot of
times. Black Jackets stopped a lot of them. and
fragments, a lot of bullets close by when it
reached right off the top of the field pocket, but
never shed a drop of blood.
It was bleached by an enemy. And I think it's just,
you can't let it, you can't think about it, you
can't let it bother you. You've just got to take it.
take
your destiny, whatever it's going to be, whatever
it's going to be. Of course, that's not saying to be
a hero, either. You can be a hero, but be smart.
Somebody just jumping up and running into an area,
he doesn't know where he's going. He probably
won't come out. A smart way to do it and a dumb way to
do it. As far as the time over
there, I don't know. That place,
a year is
about all I think an average villa can take in
certain areas. It was a whole different conflict.
I call it a war. Anytime bullets are fired, I call it
a war. That kicks me off when I read the amount of
time for it. I know it wasn't declared, but they say
it was a war, and I always did it. But that kite over
there with the weather conditions, the elements,
and the age of the GI over there, I think a year.
That's
about all they need to be able to do. And it's all
what you want to
make of it. Then the ones that are really into it and
always volunteer for another tour do a lot of it.
You can even volunteer for an extra three or four
years in the Army on and out. I drafted for two
years. And
he just can't take it over there. He melts out. They
volunteered for the next two or three or four years
of Army life, and they made a big mistake. I'm going
to have to comment on that. But I can hear this
thing. You know, it's a choice. I've
often wondered how, you know, World War II, that
you went to the war they were with or you got in or
whatever, where you killed and they came back. I
just don't know. I think it would have been a lot
worse. A lot of GIs over there took off anyway. In
my own mind, a lot of these missions and actions, it
never hurt them. I'm probably alive and well there
somewhere right now. It just took off. It
wouldn't. It was just, you know, it's what's been
made. Were you involved with the Winning the
Hearts of Minded People program? I think they had.
But you were, you tried to be the Vietnamese friend
who when
you went into the village? Oh, yeah. Yeah, I never,
uh, I never missed seeing any of the villagers. Uh,
they liked me anyway because I was boxing about too
many. Every one of them wanted a band-aid. Uh, the
kids and the mommasides all come to you for those
days and sit, um, and get half an aspirin and
everything's all right. Put a band-aid on. Some of
them did. and had no scars,
infected scars, no medication. And you could
really befriend them, at least in that way. You
think that whole idea was even possible, really,
though? With, I guess, the bad apples in your back?
It was very difficult. You could go into, say, a
village, uh you may leave that village and uh the
old chief in the village he may say you know yeah as
americans told you all right they were treated
very even left their sea rashes whatever and then
you walk out of the village and there's an old water
buffalo and there's an old pot shot and you'll see
what a m79 grenade launcher will do to a water
buffalo and then you just go on Well,
you've blown everything you've accomplished in
that business, but it's hard to do because you're
the ones that care less. How do things change for
you at the Tech? Are they different for you? Yeah.
It seems like the actual... The
resistance that you met when you went out in the
fields was like my own life. It was more just lots of
walking, old boots and tracks. Not many knew it was
being, you know, built. You can tell when one's
been there, you don't know how much it's been
built, how long it's been there. You've been there
for 10 years, just firing each day. The
Mac division,
who I was with, we pretty well pushed the car, I say,
pushed them out. Maybe we didn't. They just slowly
quit fighting as much. And I say we didn't. We never
did it like that much. I
don't know if we did or not. I
know after it was over with, I highly
underestimated them. It was amazing, I think. A
lot more than we could do with what we would have had
to get in the same situation right now. They could
take anything and make a person out of it. I don't
think they were that brave as fighters. I think
that they would get a trickier hit run and make them
take it. take
a bamboo sheet and make a mortar out of it. That kind
of thing. It's a very beautiful thing. If anybody
left behind, they could take it. What are the
awards you're supposed to get from the Vietnamese
government? What? That
was their country's medal, their country's
medal. I think it's their country's highest
medal. In the United States, I think, probably
equivalent to our DSC, but I don't know. The
Congressional is our highest medal, so I don't
know what it is. When
did
that, what
led to that? We were
airlifted in, into an LZ, we got off the choppers.
We hadn't gone far, maybe 100 yards. We were in the
middle of a rice paddy in the woodland, maybe
another 100 yards south. We were strung out, I
guess, as far as the point, being almost within 40
yards of the woodland and as far back as a couple
hundred yards. Sniper's in the woodland over
there. and
probably roughly 12, if it wasn't 6 or 12 times.
And it turned into an all day fire fight. And it kept
us pinned down. We couldn't move. We couldn't see
them. The baby boots stuck out like sore thumbs.
The grass got that high. And there was an old hooch
right out in the middle, and that turned into the
command post. And,
of
course,
there were some padded-backs that almost
everybody worked on. Padded-backs,
padded-backs, padded-backs. And, at the point,
the machine gun and his ammo barrel were both shot
through the head. They weren't dead. The radio man
made some movement for free, and that radio was
back there. I
got to
the command post and I said they need a medic to pull
in. I looked up there and it was kind of hard. It was
hot and there was a lot of bullets coming. It was one
of those things where you could just say I can't do
it. That day I found out that I just wasn't made of
it. I was more scared after the go with than going
up there. And that's where I caught a ricochet. And
got up there. It was a big soldier's off to the high
left and they just pointed to the two guys over
there. And in the meantime, we had Air Force. They
were bombing the woodlands while they were gone.
The snipers had nearly come back out of the bunkers
while they were gone. I got a word to them they were
both pretty bad. Trying
to
patch them. You just had to get up and kind of do it.
You just had to throw some fire at them, put them
back in the bunker, and then put a patch on them, ace
band advantage. So I needed to stay with it. And
because I wasn't the only medic in the outfield out
there, just to handle whatever else. But at that
time, those two guys needed a medic there at that
time. So we were right there in front of them. You
know, we were right up with them. I stayed with
them. And we changed gunfire, made it three hours,
and took care of them anyway after that. Jets
finally, I guess
they hit the bunkers close enough to where it
pushed them on back down.
They disappeared somewhere. And the choppers
came in, took the guys on the choppers, lost one of
them. I don't know. I don't know. Later on. And then
we stayed there in the field that night. do
you think the volume was affected as they used to
make all those things yeah do you think there were
actual targets or you know the methods were
reported are they just so in line involved well uh
the uh the 111 the airport the passport we called in
down in the delta yeah they were They
were accurate
enough. I mean, if we had something dropped to him,
we'd come back so close that we'd want to catch some
of the stuff. And we had soldiers, our own men,
shrapnel ripped through one of them. I didn't lose
anything. Arm or leg or part of the face or
something like that. Shrapnel or a bomb. Maybe
they won't see what a bomb looked like when it went
off. But it was close enough. Late time, and I
didn't like that stuff. Real
close in there. Real close. Got a bad smell to it,
too. It burns the flesh. It burns the flesh. Tell
when it's doing its job. The smell. I guess that's
what I remember the most. They call it the smell.
But
as far as the B-52 rays, the big bombs, I don't think
they were just bombing. I'm sure a lot of bombs
didn't get to targets involved in that too. But
as far as the fighter jets, you know, they were
looking pretty good, I think. That's just one
spot. Whatever it was, they were an airstrike for
us, but it didn't go out that way. And they got us out
alive. We
couldn't move them, they couldn't move us. They
had us, and they took them out for us to put some
heavy stuff on them. Our artillery got a lot, but it
just didn't seem like it had good effect at the
time. How did you feel when you got right here? Were
you tired? Oh, I don't know. He
sure wasn't a hero, but when he got to California, a
lot of them, like the one I talked to, he was on
there. You know, they harassed him. I wouldn't say
harassed him. You know, they were at the airport.
All kinds of stuff. I didn't pay much attention to
him. But I processed out in Oakland, California,
on the flight from Oakland. But Dallas loved Phil.
In
fact, a guy went and placed a plane with a
technician who got out of the fourth division at
the same time. He rode on the same plane from
California. Uh, wouldn't stewardages, civilian
people on the plane, they would hate him, no
question.
I
just kind of laid around the house for the first
week, and the first thing I did when Did
your friends and people that knew you then over
there, did they kind of avoid you? No, my friends
didn't. They were more curious and pleased with my
question. And talked about it. It's something I
never just refused to talk about. I think I told my
brother one time, like, talk about something
else. I
kind
of got burned out on them. But it seems like
everybody that's asked me questions, everybody
wants to talk about me sincerely.
They made me think they wanted to know something,
so I was always willing to talk to them about it. But
I don't know what my life would have been like If
I hadn't have done it, I would. The things I did and
didn't do after I got back was pretty wild when I got
back. I just was, you know, kind of a rebel type of
thing. Nobody would tell me what to do. I know that
A&M will have more time. history
class. History is one of the biggest . But
at the time, I just, you know, I'm sitting here
thinking, you know, well, I've already, I've been
on the other side of the world. I've been through
all this. I don't have to sit here and listen to this
and shake your head here. I've been out of the
classroom, and this is 23 years. It helped me. And I
was like, well, I just got in more trouble. I know
that didn't help me in anything. That was just the
way I felt. And any time you ran into a veteran
that's been over there, you made friends with
them. That's who you're most associated with. So
you're not into a little more coping? Like, a lot of
people come back and, I mean, they're really
scarred. I mean, they get all of a sudden, they're
bitter. I mean, you're not bitter. Are you bitter?
No. I was reading an author. I might have been in
this last reader's project, but... Not everybody
goes out to it. Like the Platoon movie? They went to
go see a movie with Jane Fonda. Yeah. And they went
outside in the lobby and they were just all crying.
Yeah, I went to see Platoon. I didn't go out to the
lobby. I don't know. I think I got a little drunk on
two or three scenes. It didn't bother me. The only
thing that I had to adjust to was sleeping
when I
got back. It was hard to know that you could, and it
only lasted for like a week or two. I was afraid to go
to sleep. I was afraid I wouldn't wake up, you know,
but I couldn't convince myself I was safe in the
climate of my room. Because over there, that's one
thing you did go to sleep on. So yeah, I didn't sleep
then. I don't know. It's
not a twig, it wasn't a rifle. Thunder came over the
other hand. And that and a sudden, but anymore, a
sudden rifle or pistol shot just about hit me on the
ground. But it took about over a year to get it back.
I got back in November. Pistols coming on,
firetruckers. You
know,
sometimes I thought I was going to have a heart
attack just driving down the street. And still to
this day, a gunshot that goes off without me
knowing what it's fixing to do, I really get up. It
had a pretty good impact, I guess on my life. Ever
since I was a little kid, I wanted a plate army a lot.
Say it's fulfilling a kid's dream to go to war, but
it was an experience that I wouldn't take for... I
wouldn't really want to go to war, but I wouldn't
trade it for anything. How did you feel about the
anti-war protesters? Those people, I don't
really have a whole lot of interest in them. uh
uh the
people
that
were
in school that, uh, you're smart enough to stay in
school, they, uh, I, I remember correctly, you
know, they just didn't pull you out of school. If
you chose to go to school, you could walk out of
school. Uh, married and so many kids, I think, and I
don't exactly know how much. Uh, but the ones that,
uh, deliberately, gods left the craft where they
deliberately I
tried to stay out of the distance before they took
me out the other day. I didn't have much use for
them. I mean, back to the station. What
about vets that have come back from Vietnam and now
they're against it? We had some people come and
talk to us. They were from veterans for peace and
veterans against the war. And they think the world
is totally wrong now. And they speak out against
it. And if they've been over there and they came
back, do you think they're not bitter toward it?
No. I couldn't be. I'd say if there's any
bitterness, it's at war. I'm
not even sure if
Lyndon Johnson had control over it, but somebody
did, but more than one person did. Whoever those
people were, I have no bitterness for the harm of
the military. Even
though we didn't accomplish what the G.I. wanted
us to accomplish, we had to do some good at the time.
The Vietnamese that are in America today, if we
hadn't have done it, they wouldn't be here today. A
lot of lives were changed.
I
mean, I'm kind of, I don't know how I feel about, you
know, the business coming over here now. They're
taking jobs, you know, but their lives are so much
better now than they were before. They're,
they're just like, they're, you know, they're
just looking for a better way of living.
Nobody
that lives here in the United States really has any
idea of what communism really is, except for what
you read. You go into a country that is, it would be
the last thing you would want in your country. So
even though that, you know, They
took it all over. I don't know just what I'm trying
to say. I just wish there'd been less. I would like
to see Vietnam today, a democratic society. It's a
beautiful country, and the people are great. I
hope someday I can go back to Vietnam and do this and
this. Yeah.
Oh, yeah. I don't know. It's just kind of like the
air going out of the boom, I guess. It's not like,
you know, it was all for nothing. No, it was for
something. I don't really know what, but it was.
But it was kind of sad to see it go down. You didn't
have to do that.
Let
it go,
I guess. The movies,
there's been a lot of push for movies in Vietnam and
all this stuff lately. Do you think most of that's
an adequate portrayal of what happened over
there? Somewhere they all have some authenticity
to it. I've seen 14 in a full metal jacket. There's
just, most of it's made from the entertainment.
But you can, I don't know, some of it's got some
brain to it, but the majority of it's not made from
it.
When
we were measuring
progress, do you think progress could be measured
over there when you were fighting? Because they
use body counts and various things like that. Do
you think there was really an adequate way to
measure progress over there? As far as the body
count, how you were... I mean, we've had a lot of
multiple fights and... Yeah, I think there was a
lot of stretching and shooting there. The
company commander can call in a body count. He may
not have one, but he just may have an estimation of
what. A lot of times you can see how many he did. Or
they may just say, well, there's a freighter over
here that had to be two or three, and that might have
had them before he got stressed out. I don't know.
It's a... There
was a lot of, we have found, we have made enough of
it, and it killed a lot of people. We've got
members, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of
thousands of people over there. As far as the
actual number, there is a number that we've
claimed they killed. Thank you. We have probably
more than we have to do. I
don't think so. Not where we
were
anyway. Maybe there was up
north. I have no idea.